# Image Similarity Search 

Two quick POCs have been done using the [FAISS](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss) and [nmslib](https://github.com/nmslib/nmslib) libraries. 

According to the benchmarking done by [ann-benchmarks](http://ann-benchmarks.com/), which is a benchmarking environment for approximate nearest neighbor algorithms search, hnsw (faiss) and hnsw (nmslib) have some of the best performances from a speed and recall standpoint.  

# Getting Started

The experiments were performed using CPU only. We used the market1501 dataset which contains around 32000 images, using generic embeddings generated by Resnet (512d) and Alexnet (4096d).

## Running the FAISS notebook

Easiest way to install FAISS is via conda:
```bash
# CPU version only
conda install faiss-cpu -c pytorch
```

Load the dataset in to VM. I copied from local computer to VM using the below: 
```bash
# Run this in your local machine if you want to copy data zip to VM 
scp 'New_Archive.zip' <username>@<your-vm-ip>:/<desired-vm-file-path>/
```

Change to the project directory and unzip to the "data" folder. Dataset contains images and corresponding embeddings.
```bash
unzip New_Archive.zip -d ./data
```

Exit and ssh back into your VM using:
```bash
ssh -L 8888:localhost:8888 <vm-username>@<your-vm-ip> 
```
The line above will enable you to access Jupyter using localhost in your computer's browser. 

Run Jupyter Notebook in your VM using:
```bash
jupyter notebook
```

Then, navigate to the browser in your computer using the localhost link generated when you ran the jupyter notebook command. You can test out the notebooks now. 

## Running the Nmslib notebook

Easiest way to install nmslib is via pip. Make sure you have Python 3.x. Nmslib python library install instructions [here](https://github.com/nmslib/nmslib/tree/master/python_bindings).

First, install the python dev tools:
```bash
sudo apt-get install python3-dev
```

Then do a pip install:
```bash
pip install nmslib
```

Exit and ssh back into your VM using:
```bash
ssh -L 8888:localhost:8888 <vm-username>@<your-vm-ip> 
```
The line above will enable you to access Jupyter using localhost in your computer's browser. 

Run Jupyter Notebook in your VM using:
```bash
jupyter notebook
```

You can now run the notebooks that use nmslib (like market1501-nmslib.ipynb).

## Key Observations

Here are some observations made while doing the experiments:
- Loading in 4096 dimension embeddings via txt files is not feasible. Takes over an 1.5h and still did not finish. Another storage format is needed (e.g. h5).
- Need to do benchmarking to determine best indexing strategy and parameters. Indexing strategy and parameters need to be carefully considered. Lots of tradeoffs in runtime vs accuracy, and the types of indexes/parameters you can use for optimization. 
- Need benchmarking to determine best distance metric to use. For market1501 L2 worked the best, but what about other datasets?
- Recall was not calculated as part of the POC. Need to compute ground truth data first. 
